---
title: DNS Queries over HTTPS
abbrev: DNS Queries over HTTPS
docname: draft-hoffman-dns-over-https

stand_alone: true

ipr: trust200902
area: Art
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: std

pi:
  toc: yes
  tocdepth: 4
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes

author:
 -
   ins: P. Hoffman
   name: Paul Hoffman
   org: ICANN
   email: paul.hoffman@icann.org
 -
   ins: P. McManus
   name: Patrick McManus
   org: Mozilla
   email: pmcmanus@mozilla.com

normative:
  RFC1035:
  RFC2119:
  RFC5246:
  RFC6570:
  RFC7232:
  RFC7540:

informative:
  I-D.ietf-dnsop-dns-wireformat-http:
  RFC5785:
  RFC6147:
  RFC7435:

--- abstract

Intermediaries such as governments and ISPs spoof DNS responses, and
block DNS requests to particular recursive resolvers, for a variety of reasons.
They spoof by capturing traffic on port 53, or by redirecting port 853 traffic in the hopes
that the client is using opportunistic encryption.
They block if they know the address of a resolver that they don't like, such as 
public resolvers that give honest answers.

This document describes how to run DNS service over TLS, specifically on HTTP/2,
based on the "https:" URL scheme.
This design prevents intermediaries from spoofing DNS responses, and makes
it impossible for intermediaries to block the use of those recursive resolvers
without blocking desired HTTP/2-over-TLS connections.
It also prevents intermediaries or passive observers from seeing the DNS traffic.
This design is meant for communication between a DNS stub resolver and a DNS recursive
resolver.

HTTP/2 was chosen instead of HTTP because a client wanting DNS service will
get great value out of some of HTTP/2's inherent features such as streams and
caching.

<!--
\[ This paragreaph is to be removed when this document is published as an RFC \]
Comments on this draft can be sent to the *** DISPATCH ??? *** mailing list at
<https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/SOMEURLGOESHERE>.

  RFC4035:
  RFC7230:
  HTMLSPEC:
    author:
      org: W3C
    date: 2016
    title: HTML5, A vocabulary and associated APIs for HTML and XHTML
    target: https://www.w3.org/TR/html5/
  RFC5001:
  RFC6891:
  RFC6975:
  RFC7049:
  RFC7159:
  RFC7252:
  RFC7830:
  RFC7871:
-->
--- middle

# Introduction

Over time, there have been many proposals for using HTTP and HTTPS as a substrate for DNS
queries and responses.
To date, none of those proposals have made it beyond early
discussion, partially due to disagreement about what is the "best" method to do so.
In particular, there has been disagreement about what the best format for the responses
should be.
Also, some early proposals have not followed best practices for using HTTP.

This document defines a specific protocol for sending DNS {{RFC1035}} queries and getting DNS
responses over HTTP/2 {{RFC7540}} that is running over TLS {{RFC5246}}.
The queries defined here always use the "https:" URI scheme.

A server that supports this protocol is called a "DNS API server" to differentiate it from
a "DNS server" (one that uses the regular DNS protocol).
Similarly, a client supports this protocol is called a "DNS API client".

## Use Cases

There are two primary use cases for this protocol. The primary one is to avoid
intermediaries such as governments and ISPs from spoofing DNS responses, and
blocking DNS requests to particular recursive resolvers.
A secondary use case is a web browser that wants to send DNS queries
protected in an existing HTTP/2-over-TLS session, most likely for better
privacy.

\[\[ Patrick adds something here about why HTTP/2 is better for this \]\]

Note that these use cases are different than those in a similar protocol described at
{{I-D.ietf-dnsop-dns-wireformat-http}}. The use case for that protocol is 
proxying DNS queries over HTTP instead of over DNS itself.
The use cases in this document all involve the TLS and HTTP/2 being originated at
the location where the query is desired, not acting as a proxy.

## Protocol Requirements

The protocol described here bases its design on the following protocol requirements:

* The protocol must use HTTP/2 semantics the way that they are commonly used
  in other protocols; there is nothing special about the DNS use case.

* The protocol must run over secure transport such as TLS (transport over QUIC
  can be defined later as the QUIC protocol matures, and transport over future
  protocols such as "HTTP/3" can also be defined later).

* The query format must be able to be flexible enough to express every normal
  DNS query.

* The response must be able to be in different formats that can be described
  by different documents.
  However, this is a mandatory-to-implement response format defined so that
  implementations will be interoperable.

* Both the query format and the response formats must be extensible.
  In specific, a query must be able to contain one or more EDNS extensions,
  including those not yet defined. Further, it must be easy to define different
  response formats and to extend already-defined formats.

Non-requirements:

* Supporting network-specific DNS64 {{RFC6147}}

* Supporting other network-specific inferences from plaintext DNS queries

## Terminology

In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 {{RFC2119}}.

# Template {#Template}

The URI template (see {{RFC6570}}) for DNS API queries is:

~~~
{PREFIX}/{DNSMESSAGE}
~~~

The following variables are used to expand the URI template.

## PREFIX

"PREFIX" MUST be the URI fragment "https://example.net/.well_known/TBD1/".  The URI
protocol MUST be "https:". 

## DNSMESSAGE

"DNSMESSAGE" MUST be the on-the-wire representation of a DNS query
message as defined in {{RFC1035}}, encoded with URL encoding
\[\[ REFERENCE NEEDED HERE \]\]. 
The representation is of a query as it would be sent over UDP, not over TCP.

# Queries {#queries}

To send a DNS query, the DNS API client prepares an HTTP GET request using
the template (see {{Template}}).

The HTTP-related requirements include:

* The HTTP GET request MUST have no body.

* The HTTP GET request SHOULD be sent with an HTTP "Accept:" header to say what
type of content can be returned; of course, a server can return whatever type
of content it wants. If the request does not have an HTTP "Accept:" header, the
DNS API server might return a content type that the DNS API client does not understand.

* If given, the HTTP "Accept:" MUST contain at least one entry, "application/dns-wireformat".
Other entries MAY be given

* The HTTP GET request SHOULD use If-None-Match headers if earlier responses to the same
query used HTTP ETag headers as described in {{RFC7232}}.

For example, assume that the server's PREFIX is:

~~~
   https://dnsserver.example.net/well_known/TBD1/
~~~

A query for the A records for "www.example.com" with recursion turned off
would be:

~~~
   NEED A REAL EXAMPLE HERE
~~~

The HTTP request might look like:

~~~
   GET well_known/SOMEURLENCODEDSTUFFGOESHERE
   User-Agent: curl/7.16.3 libcurl/7.16.3
   Host: dnsserver.example.net
   Accept: application/dns-wireformat
~~~


# Responses {#Responses}

Different response formats will provide more or less information from a DNS
response. For example, one response type might include the information from the
DNS header bytes while another might omit it. The amount and type of information
that a response format gives is solely up to the format, and not defined in
this protocol.

At the time this is published, the response types are works in progress. The
only known response type is "application/dns-wireformat", but it is likely that
at least one JSON-based response format might be defined in the future.

In the HTTP responses, the HTTP cache headers MAY be set to shortest DNS TTL in the response.
The HTTP responses SHOULD set the HTTP ETag headers as described in {{RFC7232}}.

TODO: Add more detail about setting the HTTP cache headers.

TODO: Add examples of creating these ETag headers.

Servers conforming to this protocol MUST implement responding with messages
formatted with "application/dns-wireformat".


IANA Considerations {#ianacons}
=======================

TODO: Apply for an entry for the .well_known registry for TBD1.
Reference {{RFC5785}}.


Security Considerations {#Security}
=======================

Running DNS over existing HTTP/2 over TLS connections relies on the security of the TLS connections
themselves.

A beneficial effect of using DNS over existing HTTP/2 over TLS connections after using DNS over
port 53 is that the DNS messages are then encrypted.

This protocol requires the use of TLS for communication. If a client does not enforce
authentication of the TLS server, the communication channel will be susceptible to many
security problems. See {{RFC7435}} for a fuller description of non-authenticated TLS.


# Acknowledgements

Joe Hildebrand contributed lots of material for a different interation of this document.

--- back

# Previous Work on DNS over HTTP or in Other Formats

The following is an incomplete list of earlier work that related to DNS over HTTP or representing DNS
data in other formats.

The list includes links to the tools.ietf.org site (because these documents
are all expired) and web sites of software.

* https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-mohan-dns-query-xml

* https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-daley-dnsxml

* https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-dulaunoy-dnsop-passive-dns-cof

* https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-bortzmeyer-dns-json

* https://www.nlnetlabs.nl/projects/dnssec-trigger/
